Start heterogeneity section (#44)
jaybee84/ml-in-rd: content/05.heterogeneity.md

### Techniques to manage disparities in data generation are required to power robust analyses in rare diseases

As with common diseases, genomic and transcriptomic data from rare diseases can suffer from artifacts introduced by batch, processing methodology, sequencing platform, or other non-biological phenomena. 

> This effect is amplified in rare diseases which often have few samples and heterogenous phenotypes.

Reviewer: I would be more specific than `This effect`. (Full disclosure: I am consciously trying to stop starting sentences with "this" in my own writing in the interest of clarity.)

Author: Hah, great point. thanks!

Furthermore, because datasets are many times pieced together from multiple small studies, disease phenotype or other important biological characteristics are often confounded by the previously mentioned "batch" factors. 
Consequently, careful assessment of confounding factors and implementation of normalization methods is important to identifying biologically meaningful features within a dataset. 
-describe some clustering methods to 
A variety of dimensionality reduction methods are can be used to visualize sample heterogeneity and potential confounding variables, including multidimensional scaling (MDS), principal components analysis (PCA), t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tSNE), and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP), among many others. [@doi:10.1007/978-3-540-33037-0_14; @doi:10.1098/rsta.2015.0202; @https://lvdmaaten.github.io/publications/papers/JMLR_2008.pdf; @arXiv:1802.03426]
All of these methods can be effectively used to identify batch effects (cite), though some, like tSNE and UMAP, have parameters that can substantially effect the output, and thus the interpretation, of the analysis [@doi:10.23915/distill.00002;@arXiv:1802.03426]. 

> Therefore, successful application of these methods requires s aufficient understanding of the underlying method and parameter sweeping to get a clear picture of the structure of the underlying data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore, successful application of these methods requires sufficient understanding of the underlying method and parameter sweeping to get a clear picture of the structure of the underlying data. 
```

Author: Oops, thanks!

### Techniques to manage disparities in data generation are required to power robust analyses in rare diseases

As with common diseases, genomic and transcriptomic data from rare diseases can suffer from artifacts introduced by batch, processing methodology, sequencing platform, or other non-biological phenomena. 
This effect is amplified in rare diseases which often have few samples and heterogenous phenotypes.
Furthermore, because datasets are many times pieced together from multiple small studies, disease phenotype or other important biological characteristics are often confounded by the previously mentioned "batch" factors. 
A key consideration here is, if possible, active dialogue with the data generators or experts in the field who may have unexpected insights into potential sources of variation. 
One example of the value of this, experienced by the authors, occurred when studying tumors associated with the disease neurofibromatosis type 1. 

> These datasets were, unbeknownst to the computational biologists, generated from samples obtained with vastly different surgical techniques (laser ablation and excision vs standard excision), resulting in substantial biological differences that are a consequence of process, not reality. 

Reviewer 2: This is a really good point. Can this phenomenon be included in batch effects? If not, is there a good data/metadata check that we can think of for new practitioners? you have already noted methodology review with collaborators/data-contributors, adding: methods section review for published data.

Author: I think this is technically a "batch effect," but it's also more than just a technical artifact since there is true biology. Presumably, in this example, it would cause the activation of heat shock protein related pathways, unfolded protein responses, etc. The same could be said for prolonged warm ischemia time, etc. 

I'm not clear what you mean by this: 
>If not, is there a good data/metadata check that we can think of for new practitioners?

I think the key lesson here for readers is that understanding the normalization challenges isn't always as simple as having comprehensive sample metadata (i.e. it will never be comprehensive enough -there's always a corner case). There may be more intangible pieces of information that an expert - in this case, a clinician - can provide to bring context to the problem.

Reviewer 2: I like your example here:
> I think this is technically a "batch effect," but it's also more than just a technical artifact since there is true biology. Presumably, in this example, it would cause the activation of heat shock protein related pathways, unfolded protein responses, etc. The same could be said for prolonged warm ischemia time, etc.

It may be helpful to include this perspective in the text to help readers understand the biological implication of this instead of thinking of it as just another batch effect/technical artifact.

Author: Great idea! done. I didn't want to belabor this point too much so I just added a sentence. I don't think it's a critical distinction to the reader.

Consequently, careful assessment of confounding factors and implementation of normalization methods is important to identifying biologically meaningful features within a dataset. 
Assessment of confounding factors and heterogeneity in rare disease datasets is perhaps most easily performed using unsupervised learning approaches such as clustering and dimensionality reduction. 

> Clustering methods like k-means clustering or hierarchical clustering can be used to characterize the structure present in many different types of data such as genomic, imaging, and health records data to identify batch effects. 

Reviewer 2: citation needed

Similarly, a variety of dimensionality reduction methods are can be used to visualize sample heterogeneity and potential confounding variables, including multidimensional scaling (MDS), principal components analysis (PCA), t-distributed stochastic neighbor embedding (tSNE), and uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP), among many others. [@doi:10.1007/978-3-540-33037-0_14; @doi:10.1098/rsta.2015.0202; @https://lvdmaaten.github.io/publications/papers/JMLR_2008.pdf; @arXiv:1802.03426]

> All of these methods can be effectively used to identify batch effects and other structure in the data (cite), though some, like tSNE and UMAP, have parameters that can substantially affect the output, and thus the interpretation, of the analysis [@doi:10.23915/distill.00002;@arXiv:1802.03426]. 

Reviewer 2: an example of the parameters referred to here can be helpful in understanding how they might affect the output.

Author: My thought was that the citations would be sufficient here, but i'll add a mention of perplexity/nearest neighbors. I think that `@doi:10.23915/distill.00002` gets this point across better than i ever could!

Therefore, successful application of these methods requires a sufficient understanding of the underlying method and parameter sweeping to get a clear picture of the structure of the underlying data. 
Dimensionality reduction techniques are not restricted to 'omic' data - they can also be used in rare disease applications to characterize the structure and heterogenity of imaging data [@doi:10.1101/826974], mass cytometry data [@doi:10.1038/ncomms14825], and others.
Once the nature of the non-biological heterogeneity has been established, different techniques can be used to correct the differences. 

> Common approaches to ameliorate non-biological effects include reprocessing the raw data using a single analysis pipeline if the data are obtained from different sources, application of batch correction methods [@doi:10.1093/biostatistics/kxj037; @doi:10.1093/nar/gku864], normalization of raw values (e.g. z-scores).

Reviewer 2: suggest adding TMM normalization (https://doi.org/10.1186/gb-2010-11-3-r25)

Reviewer 2: Also, wonder if we can recommend features for selection of specific batch correction methods or normalization methods over others.

Author: Hmm. I think method choice will be driven somewhat by downstream implementation. e.g. adding batch as a covariate in a linear model to determine differential expression is not useful if you want batch normalized counts.

Author: I don't have a good sense for whether  this is too specific of a conversation for this piece, though.

Reviewer 2: In terms of features, I was thinking more along the lines of what makes one normalization method better than another (eg. z-score vs TMM) in rare disease use cases... it may be as simple as the PCA plot looks better with one versus the other, or one has been used previously in rare disease and the other hasn't. I was just curious if there is a good rule of thumb that we can propose... it is also highly possible that a good rule of thumb does not exist :)

Author: I'd invite the other co-authors to suggest something, because I'm not aware of a good rule of thumb for this! 

I think the true rule of thumb here is to use a consistent data model and to have a codebase of different methods that can easily handle that data model, so that you waste less time throwing all the various methods at the wall.
